README.md, before:

## 🎓🔥 Intro to Cassandra for Developers using DataStax Astra 🔥🎓

Welcome to the 'Intro to Cassandra for Developers' workshop! In this two-hour workshop, the Developer Advocate team of DataStax shows the most important fundamentals and basics of the powerful distributed NoSQL database Apache Cassandra. Using Astra, the cloud based Cassandra-as-a-Service platform delivered by DataStax, we will cover the very first steps for every developer who wants to try to learn a new database: creating tables and CRUD operations. 

It doesn't matter if you join our workshop live or you prefer to do at your own pace, we have you covered. In this repository, you'll find everything you need for this workshop:

- Materials used during presentations
- Hands-on exercises
- [Workshop video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VaLwHqAHNtE)
- [Discord chat](https://bit.ly/cassandra-workshop)
- [Questions and Answers](https://community.datastax.com/)

## Homework

To complete the workshop and get verified badge, follow these simple steps:

1. Watch the workshop live or recorded.
2. Complete the workshop practice as described below and make the screenshot of the last step ("Execute CRUD").
3. Complete the following short course: [Cassandra Data Modeling](https://www.datastax.com/node/3272) and make the screenshot of the "Congratulations" page.
4. [Submit the Homework](https://github.com/DataStax-Academy/Intro-to-Cassandra-for-Developers/issues/new?assignees=HadesArchitect&labels=homework%2C+wait+for+review&template=homework.md&title=%5BHW%5D+%3CNAME%3E) attaching the screenshots.

## Table of Contents

| Title  | Description
|---|---|
| **Slide deck** | [Slide deck for the workshop](slides/Presentation.pdf) |
| **1. Create your Astra instance** | [Create your Astra instance](#1-create-your-astra-instance) |
| **2. Create a table** | [Create a table](#2-create-a-table) |
| **3. Execute CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations** | [Execute CRUD operations](#3-execute-crud-operations) |


## 1. Create your Astra instance

`ASTRA` service is available at url [https://astra.datastax.com](https://dtsx.io/workshop). `ASTRA` is the simplest way to run Cassandra with zero operations at all - just push the button and get your cluster. No credit card required, $25.00 USD credit every month, roughly 5M writes, 30M reads, 40GB storage monthly - sufficient to run small production workloads.

**✅ Step 1a. Register (if needed) and Sign In to Astra** : You can use your `Github`, `Google` accounts or register with an `email`.

Make sure to chose a password with minimum 8 characters, containing upper and lowercase letters, at least one number and special character

- [Registration Page](https://dtsx.io/workshop)

![Registration Image](images/astra-create-register.png?raw=true)

- [Authentication Page](https://dtsx.io/workshop)

![Login Image](images/astra-create-login.png?raw=true)


**✅ Step 1b. Create a "pay as you go" plan**

Follow this [guide](https://docs.datastax.com/en/astra/docs/creating-your-astra-database.html) and use the values provided below, to set up a pay as you go database with a free $25 monthly credit.

| Parameter | Value 
|---|---|
| Database name | killrvideocluster |
| Keyspace name | killrvideo |

## 2. Create a table
Ok, now that you have a database created the next step is to create a table to work with. 

**✅ Step 2a. Navigate to the CQL Console and login to the database**

In the Summary screen for your database, select **_CQL Console_** from the top menu in the main window. This will take you to the CQL Console and automatically log you in.


**✅ Step 2b. Describe keyspaces and USE killrvideo**

Ok, now we're ready to rock. Creating tables is quite easy, but before we create one we need to tell the database which keyspace we are working with.

First, let's **_DESCRIBE_** all of the keyspaces that are in the database. This will give us a list of the available keyspaces.

📘 **Command to execute**
```
desc KEYSPACES;
```
_"desc" is short for "describe", either is valid_

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 13 54 55" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94687725-8cbf8600-0324-11eb-83b0-fbd3d7fbdadc.png">

Depending on your setup you might see a different set of keyspaces then in the image. The one we care about for now is **_killrvideo_**. From here, execute the **_USE_** command with the **_killrvideo_** keyspace to tell the database our context is within **_killrvideo_**.

📘 **Command to execute**
```
use killrvideo;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 13 55 56" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94687832-b082cc00-0324-11eb-885a-d44e127cf9be.png">

Notice how the prompt displays ```KVUser@cqlsh:killrvideo>``` informing us we are **using** the **_killrvideo_** keyspace. Now we are ready to create our table.

**✅ Step 2c. Create the _users_by_city_ table**

At this point we can execute a command to create the **_users_by_city_** table using the information provided during the workshop presenation. Just copy/paste the following command into your CQL console at the prompt.

📘 **Command to execute**

```
// Users keyed by city
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS users_by_city ( 
	city text, 
	last_name text, 
	first_name text, 
	address text, 
	email text, 
	PRIMARY KEY ((city), last_name, first_name, email));
```

Then **_DESCRIBE_** your keyspace tables to ensure it is there.

📘 **Command to execute**

```
desc tables;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 13 57 32" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94687995-e88a0f00-0324-11eb-8c7a-08c3dee00eaf.png">

Aaaand **BOOM**, you created a table in your database. That's it. Now, we'll move to the next section in the presentation and break down the method used to create a data model with Apache Cassandra.

[🏠 Back to Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## 3. Execute CRUD operations
CRUD operations stand for create, read, update, and delete. Simply put, they are the basic types of commands you need to work with ANY database in order to maintain data for your applications.

**✅ Step 3a. Create a couple more tables**

We started by creating the **_users_by_city_** table earlier, but now we need to create some tables to support **user** and **video** comments per the **_"Art of Data Modeling"_** section of the presentation. Let's go ahead and do that now. Execute the following statements to create our tables.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS comments_by_user (
    userid uuid,
    commentid timeuuid,
    videoid uuid,
    comment text,
    PRIMARY KEY ((userid), commentid)
) WITH CLUSTERING ORDER BY (commentid DESC);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS comments_by_video (
    videoid   uuid,
    commentid timeuuid,
    userid    uuid,
    comment   text,
    PRIMARY KEY ((videoid), commentid)
) WITH CLUSTERING ORDER BY (commentid DESC);
```

Then **_DESCRIBE_** your keyspace tables to ensure they are both there.

📘 **Command to execute**

```
desc tables;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 13 59 50" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94688257-3bfc5d00-0325-11eb-9ec6-40d2596fb71e.png">

**✅ Step 3b. (C)RUD = create = insert data**

Our tables are in place so let's put some data in them. This is done with the **INSERT** statement. We'll start by inserting data into the **_comments_by_user_** table.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
// Comment for a given user
INSERT INTO comments_by_user (
  userid, //uuid: unique id for a user
  commentid, //timeuuid: unique uuid + timestamp
  videoid, //uuid: id for a given video
  comment //text: the comment text
)
VALUES (
  11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  NOW(), 
  12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  'I so grew up in the 80''s'
);

// More comments for the same user for the same video
INSERT INTO comments_by_user (userid, commentid, videoid, comment)
VALUES (11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111, NOW(), 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 'I keep watching this video');
INSERT INTO comments_by_user (userid, commentid, videoid, comment)
VALUES (11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111, NOW(), 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 'Soo many comments for the same video');

// A comment from another user for the same video
INSERT INTO comments_by_user (userid, commentid, videoid, comment)
VALUES (22222222-2222-2222-2222-222222222222, NOW(), 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 'I really like this video too!');
```

_Note, we are using "fake" generated UUID's in this dataset. If you wanted to generate UUID's on the fly just use ```UUID()``` per the documentation [HERE](https://docs.datastax.com/en/cql-oss/3.3/cql/cql_reference/timeuuid_functions_r.html)_.

Ok, let's **INSERT** more this time using the **_comments_by_video_** table.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
// Comment for a given video
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (
  videoid, //uuid: id for a given video
  commentid, //timeuuid: unique uuid + timestamp
  userid, //uuid: unique id for a user
  comment //text: the comment text
)
VALUES (
  12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  NOW(), 
  11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  'This is such a cool video'
);

// More comments for the same video by different users
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (videoid, commentid, userid, comment)
VALUES(12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, NOW(), 22222222-2222-2222-2222-222222222222, 'Such a killr edit');
// Ignore the hardcoded value for "commentid" instead of NOW(), we'll get to that later.
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (videoid, commentid, userid, comment)
VALUES(12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 494a3f00-e966-11ea-84bf-83e48ffdc8ac, 77777777-7777-7777-7777-777777777777, 'OMG that guy Patrick is such a geek!');

// A comment for a different video from another user
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (videoid, commentid, userid, comment)
VALUES(08765309-1234-9999-9999-111111111111, NOW(), 55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555, 'Never thought I''d see a music video about databases');
```

**✅ Step 3c. C(R)UD = read = read data**

Now that we've inserted a set of data, let's take a look at how to read that data back out. This is done with a **SELECT** statement. In its simplist form we could just execute a statement like the following **_**cough_** **_**cough_**:
```
SELECT * FROM comments_by_user;
```

You may have noticed my coughing fit a moment ago. Even though you can execute a **SELECT** statement with no partition key definied this is NOT something you should do when using Apache Cassandra. We are doing it here for illustration purposes only and because our dataset only has a handful of values. Given the data we inserted earlier a more proper statement would be something like:
```
SELECT * FROM comments_by_user WHERE userid = 11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111;
```

The key is to ensure we are **always selecting by some partition key** at a minimum.

Ok, so with that out of the way let's **READ** the data we _"created"_ earlier with our **INSERT** statements.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
// Read all data from the comments_by_user table
SELECT * FROM comments_by_user;

// Read all data from the comments_by_video table
SELECT * FROM comments_by_video;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 14 03 18" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94688606-bb8a2c00-0325-11eb-8124-5c4d9ac0d4fc.png">

Once you execute the above **SELECT** statements you should see something like the expected output above. We have now **READ** the data we **INSERTED** earlier. Awesome job!

_BTW, just a little extra for those who are interested. Since we used a [TIMEUUID](https://docs.datastax.com/en/cql-oss/3.3/cql/cql_reference/timeuuid_functions_r.html) type for our **commentid** field we can use the **dateOf()** function to determine the timestamp from the value. Check it out._

```
// Read all data from the comments_by_user table, 
// convert commentid into a timestamp, and label the column "datetime"
select userid, dateOf(commentid) as datetime, videoid, comment from comments_by_user;
```


**✅ Step 3d. CR(U)D = update = update data**

At this point we've **_CREATED_** and **_READ_** some data, but what happens when you want to change some existing data to some new value? That's where **UPDATE** comes into play.

Let's take one of the records we created earlier and modify it. If you remember earlier we **_INSERTED_** the following record in the **comments_by_video** table.
```
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (
  videoid, 
  commentid, 
  userid, 
  comment
)
VALUES(
  12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  494a3f00-e966-11ea-84bf-83e48ffdc8ac, 
  77777777-7777-7777-7777-777777777777, 
  'OMG that guy Patrick is such a geek!'
);
```

Let's also take a look at the **comments_by_video** table we created earlier. In order to **UPDATE** an existing record we need to know the primary key used to **CREATE** the record.
```
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS comments_by_video (
    videoid   uuid,
    commentid timeuuid,
    userid    uuid,
    comment   text,
    PRIMARY KEY ((videoid), commentid)
) WITH CLUSTERING ORDER BY (commentid DESC);
```
So looking at ```PRIMARY KEY ((videoid), commentid)``` both **videoid** and **commentid** are used to create a unique row. We'll need both to update our record. 

_You may remember that I also glossed over the fact we used a hardcoded value for **commentid** when we created this record. This was done to simulate someone editing an existing comment for a video in our application. Imagine the UX for such a need. At the point a user clicks the "edit" button information for our **videoid** and **commentid** are provided in order to **UPDATE** the record._

We have the information that we need for the update. With that, the command is easy.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
UPDATE comments_by_video 
SET comment = 'OMG that guy Patrick is on fleek' 
WHERE videoid = 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111 AND commentid = 494a3f00-e966-11ea-84bf-83e48ffdc8ac;

SELECT * FROM comments_by_video;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 14 05 21" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94688803-0015c780-0326-11eb-96e3-b76fb59a9d11.png">

That's it. All that's left now is to **DELETE** some data.

**✅ Step 3e. CRU(D) = delete = remove data**

The final operation from our **CRUD** acronym is **DELETE**. This is the operation we use when we want to remove data from the database. In Apache Cassandra you can **DELETE** from the cell level all the way up to the partition _(meaning I could remove a single column in a single row or I could remove a whole partition)_ using the same **DELETE** command.

_Generally speaking, it's best to perform as few delete operations as possible on the largest amount of data. Think of it this way, if you want to delete ALL data in a table, don't delete each individual cell, just **TRUNCATE** the table. If you need to delete all the rows in a partition, don't delete each row, **DELETE** the partition and so on._

For our purpose now let's **DELETE** the same row we were working with earlier.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
DELETE FROM comments_by_video 
WHERE videoid = 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111 AND commentid = 494a3f00-e966-11ea-84bf-83e48ffdc8ac;

SELECT * FROM comments_by_video;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 14 07 05" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94689019-3eab8200-0326-11eb-86b9-010c130a49c3.png">

Notice the row is now removed from the comments_by_video table, it's as simple as that.

## 4. Wrapping up
We've just scratched the surface of what you can do using DataStax Astra with Apache Cassandra. Go take a look at [DataStax for Developers](https://www.datastax.com/dev) to see what else is possible. There's plenty to dig into!

# Done?

Don't forget to submit your homework to get verified "upgrade complete" badge!

Commit message:

Updated to include homework for both CQL and Data modeling courses

README.md, after:

## 🎓🔥 Intro to Cassandra for Developers using DataStax Astra 🔥🎓

Welcome to the 'Intro to Cassandra for Developers' workshop! In this two-hour workshop, the Developer Advocate team of DataStax shows the most important fundamentals and basics of the powerful distributed NoSQL database Apache Cassandra. Using Astra, the cloud based Cassandra-as-a-Service platform delivered by DataStax, we will cover the very first steps for every developer who wants to try to learn a new database: creating tables and CRUD operations. 

It doesn't matter if you join our workshop live or you prefer to do at your own pace, we have you covered. In this repository, you'll find everything you need for this workshop:

- Materials used during presentations
- Hands-on exercises
- [Workshop video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VaLwHqAHNtE)
- [Discord chat](https://bit.ly/cassandra-workshop)
- [Questions and Answers](https://community.datastax.com/)

## Homework

To complete the workshop and get verified badge, follow these simple steps:

1. Watch the workshop live or recorded.
2. Complete the workshop practice as described below and make the screenshot of the last step ("Execute CRUD").
3. Complete the following short courses: [Cassandra Data Modeling](https://www.datastax.com/node/3272) and [Cassandra Query Language](https://www.datastax.com/dev/scenario/try-it-out-cassandra-query-language-cql). Take screenshots of the "Congratulations" page from each course.
4. [Submit the Homework](https://github.com/DataStax-Academy/Intro-to-Cassandra-for-Developers/issues/new?assignees=HadesArchitect&labels=homework%2C+wait+for+review&template=homework.md&title=%5BHW%5D+%3CNAME%3E) attaching the screenshots.

## Table of Contents

| Title  | Description
|---|---|
| **Slide deck** | [Slide deck for the workshop](slides/Presentation.pdf) |
| **1. Create your Astra instance** | [Create your Astra instance](#1-create-your-astra-instance) |
| **2. Create a table** | [Create a table](#2-create-a-table) |
| **3. Execute CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations** | [Execute CRUD operations](#3-execute-crud-operations) |


## 1. Create your Astra instance

`ASTRA` service is available at url [https://astra.datastax.com](https://dtsx.io/workshop). `ASTRA` is the simplest way to run Cassandra with zero operations at all - just push the button and get your cluster. No credit card required, $25.00 USD credit every month, roughly 5M writes, 30M reads, 40GB storage monthly - sufficient to run small production workloads.

**✅ Step 1a. Register (if needed) and Sign In to Astra** : You can use your `Github`, `Google` accounts or register with an `email`.

Make sure to chose a password with minimum 8 characters, containing upper and lowercase letters, at least one number and special character

- [Registration Page](https://dtsx.io/workshop)

![Registration Image](images/astra-create-register.png?raw=true)

- [Authentication Page](https://dtsx.io/workshop)

![Login Image](images/astra-create-login.png?raw=true)


**✅ Step 1b. Create a "pay as you go" plan**

Follow this [guide](https://docs.datastax.com/en/astra/docs/creating-your-astra-database.html) and use the values provided below, to set up a pay as you go database with a free $25 monthly credit.

| Parameter | Value 
|---|---|
| Database name | killrvideocluster |
| Keyspace name | killrvideo |

## 2. Create a table
Ok, now that you have a database created the next step is to create a table to work with. 

**✅ Step 2a. Navigate to the CQL Console and login to the database**

In the Summary screen for your database, select **_CQL Console_** from the top menu in the main window. This will take you to the CQL Console and automatically log you in.


**✅ Step 2b. Describe keyspaces and USE killrvideo**

Ok, now we're ready to rock. Creating tables is quite easy, but before we create one we need to tell the database which keyspace we are working with.

First, let's **_DESCRIBE_** all of the keyspaces that are in the database. This will give us a list of the available keyspaces.

📘 **Command to execute**
```
desc KEYSPACES;
```
_"desc" is short for "describe", either is valid_

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 13 54 55" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94687725-8cbf8600-0324-11eb-83b0-fbd3d7fbdadc.png">

Depending on your setup you might see a different set of keyspaces then in the image. The one we care about for now is **_killrvideo_**. From here, execute the **_USE_** command with the **_killrvideo_** keyspace to tell the database our context is within **_killrvideo_**.

📘 **Command to execute**
```
use killrvideo;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 13 55 56" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94687832-b082cc00-0324-11eb-885a-d44e127cf9be.png">

Notice how the prompt displays ```KVUser@cqlsh:killrvideo>``` informing us we are **using** the **_killrvideo_** keyspace. Now we are ready to create our table.

**✅ Step 2c. Create the _users_by_city_ table**

At this point we can execute a command to create the **_users_by_city_** table using the information provided during the workshop presenation. Just copy/paste the following command into your CQL console at the prompt.

📘 **Command to execute**

```
// Users keyed by city
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS users_by_city ( 
	city text, 
	last_name text, 
	first_name text, 
	address text, 
	email text, 
	PRIMARY KEY ((city), last_name, first_name, email));
```

Then **_DESCRIBE_** your keyspace tables to ensure it is there.

📘 **Command to execute**

```
desc tables;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 13 57 32" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94687995-e88a0f00-0324-11eb-8c7a-08c3dee00eaf.png">

Aaaand **BOOM**, you created a table in your database. That's it. Now, we'll move to the next section in the presentation and break down the method used to create a data model with Apache Cassandra.

[🏠 Back to Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)

## 3. Execute CRUD operations
CRUD operations stand for create, read, update, and delete. Simply put, they are the basic types of commands you need to work with ANY database in order to maintain data for your applications.

**✅ Step 3a. Create a couple more tables**

We started by creating the **_users_by_city_** table earlier, but now we need to create some tables to support **user** and **video** comments per the **_"Art of Data Modeling"_** section of the presentation. Let's go ahead and do that now. Execute the following statements to create our tables.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS comments_by_user (
    userid uuid,
    commentid timeuuid,
    videoid uuid,
    comment text,
    PRIMARY KEY ((userid), commentid)
) WITH CLUSTERING ORDER BY (commentid DESC);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS comments_by_video (
    videoid   uuid,
    commentid timeuuid,
    userid    uuid,
    comment   text,
    PRIMARY KEY ((videoid), commentid)
) WITH CLUSTERING ORDER BY (commentid DESC);
```

Then **_DESCRIBE_** your keyspace tables to ensure they are both there.

📘 **Command to execute**

```
desc tables;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 13 59 50" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94688257-3bfc5d00-0325-11eb-9ec6-40d2596fb71e.png">

**✅ Step 3b. (C)RUD = create = insert data**

Our tables are in place so let's put some data in them. This is done with the **INSERT** statement. We'll start by inserting data into the **_comments_by_user_** table.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
// Comment for a given user
INSERT INTO comments_by_user (
  userid, //uuid: unique id for a user
  commentid, //timeuuid: unique uuid + timestamp
  videoid, //uuid: id for a given video
  comment //text: the comment text
)
VALUES (
  11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  NOW(), 
  12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  'I so grew up in the 80''s'
);

// More comments for the same user for the same video
INSERT INTO comments_by_user (userid, commentid, videoid, comment)
VALUES (11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111, NOW(), 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 'I keep watching this video');
INSERT INTO comments_by_user (userid, commentid, videoid, comment)
VALUES (11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111, NOW(), 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 'Soo many comments for the same video');

// A comment from another user for the same video
INSERT INTO comments_by_user (userid, commentid, videoid, comment)
VALUES (22222222-2222-2222-2222-222222222222, NOW(), 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 'I really like this video too!');
```

_Note, we are using "fake" generated UUID's in this dataset. If you wanted to generate UUID's on the fly just use ```UUID()``` per the documentation [HERE](https://docs.datastax.com/en/cql-oss/3.3/cql/cql_reference/timeuuid_functions_r.html)_.

Ok, let's **INSERT** more this time using the **_comments_by_video_** table.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
// Comment for a given video
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (
  videoid, //uuid: id for a given video
  commentid, //timeuuid: unique uuid + timestamp
  userid, //uuid: unique id for a user
  comment //text: the comment text
)
VALUES (
  12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  NOW(), 
  11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  'This is such a cool video'
);

// More comments for the same video by different users
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (videoid, commentid, userid, comment)
VALUES(12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, NOW(), 22222222-2222-2222-2222-222222222222, 'Such a killr edit');
// Ignore the hardcoded value for "commentid" instead of NOW(), we'll get to that later.
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (videoid, commentid, userid, comment)
VALUES(12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 494a3f00-e966-11ea-84bf-83e48ffdc8ac, 77777777-7777-7777-7777-777777777777, 'OMG that guy Patrick is such a geek!');

// A comment for a different video from another user
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (videoid, commentid, userid, comment)
VALUES(08765309-1234-9999-9999-111111111111, NOW(), 55555555-5555-5555-5555-555555555555, 'Never thought I''d see a music video about databases');
```

**✅ Step 3c. C(R)UD = read = read data**

Now that we've inserted a set of data, let's take a look at how to read that data back out. This is done with a **SELECT** statement. In its simplist form we could just execute a statement like the following **_**cough_** **_**cough_**:
```
SELECT * FROM comments_by_user;
```

You may have noticed my coughing fit a moment ago. Even though you can execute a **SELECT** statement with no partition key definied this is NOT something you should do when using Apache Cassandra. We are doing it here for illustration purposes only and because our dataset only has a handful of values. Given the data we inserted earlier a more proper statement would be something like:
```
SELECT * FROM comments_by_user WHERE userid = 11111111-1111-1111-1111-111111111111;
```

The key is to ensure we are **always selecting by some partition key** at a minimum.

Ok, so with that out of the way let's **READ** the data we _"created"_ earlier with our **INSERT** statements.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
// Read all data from the comments_by_user table
SELECT * FROM comments_by_user;

// Read all data from the comments_by_video table
SELECT * FROM comments_by_video;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 14 03 18" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94688606-bb8a2c00-0325-11eb-8124-5c4d9ac0d4fc.png">

Once you execute the above **SELECT** statements you should see something like the expected output above. We have now **READ** the data we **INSERTED** earlier. Awesome job!

_BTW, just a little extra for those who are interested. Since we used a [TIMEUUID](https://docs.datastax.com/en/cql-oss/3.3/cql/cql_reference/timeuuid_functions_r.html) type for our **commentid** field we can use the **dateOf()** function to determine the timestamp from the value. Check it out._

```
// Read all data from the comments_by_user table, 
// convert commentid into a timestamp, and label the column "datetime"
select userid, dateOf(commentid) as datetime, videoid, comment from comments_by_user;
```


**✅ Step 3d. CR(U)D = update = update data**

At this point we've **_CREATED_** and **_READ_** some data, but what happens when you want to change some existing data to some new value? That's where **UPDATE** comes into play.

Let's take one of the records we created earlier and modify it. If you remember earlier we **_INSERTED_** the following record in the **comments_by_video** table.
```
INSERT INTO comments_by_video (
  videoid, 
  commentid, 
  userid, 
  comment
)
VALUES(
  12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111, 
  494a3f00-e966-11ea-84bf-83e48ffdc8ac, 
  77777777-7777-7777-7777-777777777777, 
  'OMG that guy Patrick is such a geek!'
);
```

Let's also take a look at the **comments_by_video** table we created earlier. In order to **UPDATE** an existing record we need to know the primary key used to **CREATE** the record.
```
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS comments_by_video (
    videoid   uuid,
    commentid timeuuid,
    userid    uuid,
    comment   text,
    PRIMARY KEY ((videoid), commentid)
) WITH CLUSTERING ORDER BY (commentid DESC);
```
So looking at ```PRIMARY KEY ((videoid), commentid)``` both **videoid** and **commentid** are used to create a unique row. We'll need both to update our record. 

_You may remember that I also glossed over the fact we used a hardcoded value for **commentid** when we created this record. This was done to simulate someone editing an existing comment for a video in our application. Imagine the UX for such a need. At the point a user clicks the "edit" button information for our **videoid** and **commentid** are provided in order to **UPDATE** the record._

We have the information that we need for the update. With that, the command is easy.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
UPDATE comments_by_video 
SET comment = 'OMG that guy Patrick is on fleek' 
WHERE videoid = 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111 AND commentid = 494a3f00-e966-11ea-84bf-83e48ffdc8ac;

SELECT * FROM comments_by_video;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 14 05 21" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94688803-0015c780-0326-11eb-96e3-b76fb59a9d11.png">

That's it. All that's left now is to **DELETE** some data.

**✅ Step 3e. CRU(D) = delete = remove data**

The final operation from our **CRUD** acronym is **DELETE**. This is the operation we use when we want to remove data from the database. In Apache Cassandra you can **DELETE** from the cell level all the way up to the partition _(meaning I could remove a single column in a single row or I could remove a whole partition)_ using the same **DELETE** command.

_Generally speaking, it's best to perform as few delete operations as possible on the largest amount of data. Think of it this way, if you want to delete ALL data in a table, don't delete each individual cell, just **TRUNCATE** the table. If you need to delete all the rows in a partition, don't delete each row, **DELETE** the partition and so on._

For our purpose now let's **DELETE** the same row we were working with earlier.

📘 **Commands to execute**

```
DELETE FROM comments_by_video 
WHERE videoid = 12345678-1234-1111-1111-111111111111 AND commentid = 494a3f00-e966-11ea-84bf-83e48ffdc8ac;

SELECT * FROM comments_by_video;
```

📗 **Expected output**

<img width="1000" alt="Screenshot 2020-09-30 at 14 07 05" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/20337262/94689019-3eab8200-0326-11eb-86b9-010c130a49c3.png">

Notice the row is now removed from the comments_by_video table, it's as simple as that.

## 4. Wrapping up
We've just scratched the surface of what you can do using DataStax Astra with Apache Cassandra. Go take a look at [DataStax for Developers](https://www.datastax.com/dev) to see what else is possible. There's plenty to dig into!

# Done?

Don't forget to submit your homework to get verified "upgrade complete" badge!
